# Governance Metadata Standards: Landscape and Gap Analysis

## Executive Summary

Individual-level linkages between biomedical study datasets and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) administrative and survey datasets provide opportunities to maximize the value of existing data. Linkage enables researchers to deduplicate participants across datasets, introduce new variables into analysis plans, reduce costly redundancies in data generation, perform longitudinal analysis, and ask new scientific questions of the enriched dataset. To appropriately link datasets, researchers and data stewards must understand the consent, policy, regulatory, and/or other legal frameworks that apply to each of the original datasets and how the resulting linked dataset inherits rules and controls from these frameworks. They must also understand if and how new limitations arise that impact the sharing and use of the resulting linked dataset; for example, a need to implement new rules and controls to mitigate increased risk of participant identifiability. The collective set of these rules and controls is referred to as data governance, and it defines and enforces appropriate collection, sharing, access, linking, and use of the data, across the data lifecycle. The standardization of data governance information about datasets will help researchers and data stewards determine whether multiple datasets can be linked, and, if so, what data governance applies to the linked dataset.

Metadata related to data governance to support decision making around dataset linkage is widely acknowledged as necessary to enable knowledge discovery from and responsible use of existing data. These metadata should address information related to appropriate data linkage, sharing, and use; provenance; roles and responsibilities of stakeholders; and decision making.

The National Institutes of Health (NIH) has identified the need to improve efficiency and harmonization among controlled-access repositories to make NIH data more findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR) and to ensure appropriate oversight when data from different resources are combined. The Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) Office of Data Science and Sharing (ODSS) is leading an effort to assess the usage of privacy preserving record linkage for pediatric patient-centered outcomes research, with a focus on pediatric Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) research with support from HHS Office of the Secretary Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Trust Fund (OS-PCORTF) and the NIH Office of Data Science Strategy (NIH ODSS). During foundational governance work that informs the current project, NICHD ODSS uncovered a rich and complex governance information ecosystem, for which no data governance metadata schema or user tools exists.

NICHD ODSS has engaged the Health federally funded research and development center (Health FFRDC), operated by The MITRE Corporation, to develop a robust metadata schema for data governance information relevant to linking individual-level participant data and sharing and using linked datasets. Both structured and unstructured text, often stored in a narrative format within policy documents, data use agreements, and consent forms, must be annotated through the application of a data governance metadata schema. Standards, including ontologies, terminologies, vocabularies, schemas, and common data models, are the tools and methods to organize, codify, value, and annotate unstructured governance information with structured governance metadata that may be extensible and machine-readable.

The purpose of the landscape analysis is to identify existing standards that could be used in a data governance metadata schema. The analysis consisted of the development of an inventory of existing standards, an assessment of utility of those standards, and a gap analysis based on governance information domains derived from the NICHD ODSS-developed Governance Information Framework.

A multi-pronged and iterative search yielded 47 standards of which 33 met inclusion criteria of being a standard in use or in development in the United States or abroad that could be applied to any governance information domain or attribute derived from the Governance Information Framework, or data linkage or use concepts discussed in the preceding NICHD ODSS reports.[i],[ii]The project team did not recommend 20 of these based on assessment of the utility which included criteria related to completeness and community intent, logical consistency and coherence, accessibility, active use and community adoption, and maturity. The project team recommended the remaining 13 standards for use in the data governance metadata schema and included them in the gap analysis. The standards that proceeded to the gap analysis phase are: Data Catalog Vocabulary, Data Documentation Initiative, Data Tags Suite, Data Use Ontology, Dublin Core, Fast Health Information Resources Consent Resource, Fast Health Information Resources Data Segmentation for Privacy and Security Labeling, Informed Consent Ontology, National Cancer Institute Thesaurus, Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards (OASIS) LegalRuleML, Observational Medical Outcomes Partnership Common Data Model, Open Digital Rights Language, and Operational Data Model.

The project team identified gaps by mapping standards and utility assessment findings to the governance information domains. They identified gaps in nine of the 13 governance information domains: Dataset Information, Linkage, Consent, Institutional Review Board, Policy, Rules, Controls, Party, and Data Lifecycle. They determined there are adequate standards to address only four domains: Governing Body, Law (includes Regulations and Statutes), Agreement, and Authorization.

Summary recommendations for the NICHD ODSS data governance metadata schema development focus on the Open Digital Rights Language standard and Fast Health Information Resources (FHIR) Consent information models, with value sets drawn from FHIR terminology and Data Use Ontology. The findings from this landscape analysis, utility assessment, and gap analysis inform this approach. No single standard fully addresses the schema requirements across all governance information domains, necessitating the use of multiple standards and combining elements from various sources, as well as potentially developing new value sets (e.g., to capture linkage metadata). The maturity and licensing of existing standards are also significant factors influencing their utility and adoption.

The findings from this landscape and gap analysis will support the advancement of a data governance metadata schema. The schema should balance the need for consistency and interoperability with the need for flexibility and adaptability to accommodate evolving research needs and regulatory requirements. Minimizing the number of standards referenced and maximizing coverage of domains allows for a more practical and flexible solution, better management of variability over time, and a better optimized schema. Furthermore, schema development should be guided by a strong commitment to collaboration and engagement with researchers, data providers, and policy makers, to ensure that the schema is both practical and effective in addressing the diverse needs of the research community. The schema will subsequently contribute to NIH-wide strategic goals and activities on Controlled Data Access Coordination.

By adopting a thoughtful and strategic approach to governance metadata schema development, informed by the findings and recommendations presented in this report, the NICHD ODSS can pave the way for a more standardized, efficient, and transparent system of metadata data governance that supports the advancement of research, data sharing and reuse, and innovation in the field. We also hope this report will be useful to researchers generating datasets, data stewards, stakeholders interested in research using linked datasets across HHS agencies and NIH as well as more broadly, and the patient-centered outcomes research community.

The Office of the Secretary Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Trust Fund funded this project as part of a portfolio of data capacity projects related to patient-centered outcomes research and data linkage, aligned with Goal 2, Data Standards and Linkages for Longitudinal Research, in the next decade’s strategic plan.

Full report available here: <placeholder for link>.
 
Report citation: CMS Alliance to Modernize Healthcare (The Health FFRDC). Data Governance Metadata Standards: Landscape and Gap Analysis. Prepared under Contract No. 75N94023F00171. January 2024.
 
Related reports:

* National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Office of Data Science and Sharing with Booz Allen Hamilton. Privacy Preserving Record Linkage (PPRL) for Pediatric COVID-19 Studies. [Internet]. September 2022. Available from: https://www.nichd.nih.gov/sites/default/files/inline-files/NICHD_ODSS_PPRL_for_Pediatric_COVID-19_Studies_Public_Final_Report_508.pdf.

* Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Office of Data Science and Sharing with Essex Management and Booz Allen Hamilton. PCORTF Pediatric Record Linkage Governance Assessment. [Internet]. December 2023. Available from: https://www.nichd.nih.gov/about/org/od/odss
